[Doc] Add current plugin persistence implementation readme (#3081)
opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards: docs/plugins/data_persistence.md

# Data persistence

> There are four plugins that currently have data persistence ability in opensearch dashboard: dashboard, discover, timeline, visualize, and vis-builder. They are using the following services and mechanisms from opensearch_dashboard_utils plugin to achieve data persistence.

Reviewer: Can you define data persistence? Maybe something like

```suggestion
There are currently five plugins that have the ability to persist user data and configurations when users navigate between them in  OpenSearch Dashboards: `dashboard`, `discover`, `timeline`, `visualize`, and `vis-builder`. To achieve this, they use services and mechanisms from `opensearch_dashboard_utils`plugin.
```

> There are four plugins that currently have data persistence ability in opensearch dashboard: dashboard, discover, timeline, visualize, and vis-builder. They are using the following services and mechanisms from opensearch_dashboard_utils plugin to achieve data persistence.

Reviewer 2: Could we add a definition of Data persistence?

Author: Added some explanations for data persistence.

> State syncing utils are a set of helpers to sync application state with URL or browser storage(when turning state: `storeInSessionStore` on in advanced setting, in case of overflowed URL):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
State syncing utils are a set of helpers to sync application state with URL or browser storage (when setting state: `storeInSessionStore` to `true` in advanced settings, or in the case of an overflowed URL):
```

1. `syncState()`: subscribe to state changes and push them to state storage; subscribe to state storage and push them to state container
2. storages that are compatible with `syncState()`

> * `OsdUrlStateStorage`: serialize state and persist it to URL's query param in rison format; listen for state change in URL and update them back to state

Reviewer: can we have a link or reference for "rison format"?

Reviewer 2: yah feel that we should add some explains of `rison format`

Author: Added a link to the rison github repo

> * `SessionStorageStateStorage`: serialize state and persist it to URL's query param in session storage

Reviewer: Is this the intended list formatting, or should these also be numbered and indented?

Author: Either works. Changed to numbered and indented for better readability.

3. state containers: redux-store like objects to help manage states and provide a central place to store state

> # Two type of persistence

Reviewer 2: Two types of persistence

> There are two parts for data persistence: 

Reviewer 2: Maybe `two types` is better?

1. App state (example from visualization plugin)
    1. App state storage key: '_a'
    2. App state is persistent only within the specific app, values will persist when we refresh the page, values will not be persist when we navigate away from the app
    3. For visualize app, the params are:
       1. Query

       ![img](./img/app_query.png)

       2. App filters 

       ![img](./img/app_filter.png)
       
       3. Vis & UI state

       ![img](./img/visualization.png)
2. Global query state 
    1. Global state storage key: '_g'

>     2. Global query state is persistent across the entire application, values will persist when we refresh the page, or when we navigate across visualize, discover, timeline or dashboard page. For example, if we set time range to last 24 hours, and refresh intervals to every 30 min, the same time range and refresh intervals will be applied if we navigate to any of the other pages.

Reviewer: to disambiguate the concept of plugin-defined apps from OSD as an app:

```suggestion
    2. Global query state is persistent across the entire OpenSearch Dashboards application, values will persist when we refresh the page, or when we navigate across visualize, discover, timeline or dashboard page. For example, if we set time range to last 24 hours, and refresh intervals to every 30 min, the same time range and refresh intervals will be applied if we navigate to any of the other pages.
```

    3. Params:
       1. global filters (Select `pin filter` to make the filters global)

       ![img](./img/global_filter.png)

       2. refresh intervals

       ![img](./img/refresh_interval.png)

       3. time range

       ![img](./img/time_range.png)

# URL breakdown & example

![img](./img/URL_example.png)

> # Global state persistence

Reviewer: ```suggestion

# Global state persistence
```

1. In plugin.ts, during plugin setup, call `createOsdUrlTracker()`, listen to history changes and global state changes, then update the nav link URL. This also returns function such as `onMountApp()`, `onUnmountedApp()`
    ```ts
            const {
        appMounted,
        appUnMounted,
        ...
        } = createOsdUrlTracker({
        baseUrl: core.http.basePath.prepend('/app/visualize'),
        defaultSubUrl: '#/',
        storageKey: `lastUrl:${core.http.basePath.get()}:visualize`,
        navLinkUpdater$: this.appStateUpdater,
        stateParams: [
        {
            osdUrlKey: '_g',
            stateUpdate$: data.query.state$.pipe(
            filter(
                ({ changes }) => !!(changes.globalFilters || changes.time || changes.refreshInterval)
            ),
            map(({ state }) => ({
                ...state,
                filters: state.filters?.filter(opensearchFilters.isFilterPinned),
            }))
            ),
        },
        ],
        ....
    ```

>     * When we enter the app and app is mounted, it initialize nav link by getting previously stored URL from storage instance: const storedUrl = storageInstance.getItem(storageKey). (Storage instance is a browser wide session storage instance.) Then it unsubscribes to global state$ and subscribes to URL$. The current app actively listens to history location changes. If there are changes, set the updated URL as the active URL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * When we enter the app and app is mounted, it initialize nav link by getting previously stored URL from storage instance: `const storedUrl = storageInstance.getItem(storageKey)`. (Storage instance is a browser wide session storage instance.) Then it unsubscribes to global `state$` and subscribes to `URL$`. The current app actively listens to history location changes. If there are changes, set the updated URL as the active URL
```

>     * When we enter the app and app is mounted, it initialize nav link by getting previously stored URL from storage instance: const storedUrl = storageInstance.getItem(storageKey). (Storage instance is a browser wide session storage instance.) Then it unsubscribes to global state$ and subscribes to URL$. The current app actively listens to history location changes. If there are changes, set the updated URL as the active URL

Reviewer 2: `initializes`

    ```ts
      function onMountApp() {
      unsubscribe();
      ...
      // track current hash when within app
            unsubscribeURLHistory = historyInstance.listen((location) => {
                  ...
                  setActiveUrl(location.hash.substr(1));
               }
            });
         }
    ```

>     * When we are leaving the app and app is unmounted, unsubscribe URL$ and subscribe to global state$. If the global states are changed in another app, the global state listener will still get triggered in this app even though it is unmounted, it will set the updated URL in storage instance, so next time when we enter the app, it gets the URL from the storage instance thus the global state will persist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * When we are leaving the app and app is unmounted, unsubscribe` URL$` and subscribe to global `state$`. If the global states are changed in another app, the global state listener will still get triggered in this app even though it is unmounted, it will set the updated URL in storage instance, so next time when we enter the app, it gets the URL from the storage instance thus the global state will persist.
```

    ```ts
        function onUnmountApp() {
            unsubscribe();
            // propagate state updates when in other apps
                unsubscribeGlobalState = stateParams.map(({ stateUpdate$, osdUrlKey }) =>
                        stateUpdate$.subscribe((state) => {
                        ...
                        const updatedUrl = setStateToOsdUrl( ... );
                        ...
                        storageInstance.setItem(storageKey, activeUrl);
                })
            );
        }
    ```

> 2. In app.tsx, call syncQueryStateWithUrl(query, osdUrlStateStorage) to sync '_g' portion of url with global state params

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In `app.tsx`, call `syncQueryStateWithUrl(query, osdUrlStateStorage)` to sync `_g` portion of url with global state params
```

>     * When we first enter the app, there is no initial state in the URL, then we initialize and put the _g key into url

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * When we first enter the app, there is no initial state in the URL, so we initialize and put the `_g` key into url
```

    ```ts
        if (!initialStateFromUrl) {
        osdUrlStateStorage.set<QueryState>(GLOBAL_STATE_STORAGE_KEY, initialState, {
        replace: true,
        });
        }
    ```

>     * When we enter the app, if there is some initial state in the URL(the previous saved URL in storageInstance), then we retrieve global state from '_g' URL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * When we enter the app, if there is some initial state in the URL(the previous saved URL in `storageInstance`), then we retrieve global state from `_g` URL
```

    ```ts
      // retrieve current state from `_g` url
        const initialStateFromUrl = osdUrlStateStorage.get<QueryState>(GLOBAL_STATE_STORAGE_KEY);
        // remember whether there was info in the URL
        const hasInheritedQueryFromUrl = Boolean(
            initialStateFromUrl && Object.keys(initialStateFromUrl).length
        );
        // prepare initial state, whatever was in URL takes precedences over current state in services
        const initialState: QueryState = {
            ...defaultState,
            ...initialStateFromUrl,
        };
    ```

>     * if we make some changes to the global state: 1. stateUpdate$ get triggered for all other unmounted app(if we made the change in visualize plugin, then the stateUpdate$ will get triggered for dashboard, discover, timeline), then it will call setStateToOsdUrl() to set updatedURL in storageInstance so global state get updated for all unmounted app. 2. updateStorage() get triggered for currentApp to update current URL state storage, then global query state container will also be in sync with URL state storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * If we make some changes to the global state: 1. `stateUpdate$` get triggered for all other unmounted app(if we made the change in visualize plugin, then the `stateUpdate$` will get triggered for dashboard, discover, timeline), then it will call `setStateToOsdUrl()` to set `updatedURL` in `storageInstance` so global state get updated for all unmounted app. 2. `updateStorage()` get triggered for `currentApp` to update current URL state storage, then global query state container will also be in sync with URL state storage
```

5. In `useEditorUpdates()`, it uses the updated appState to load the visualization with previous saved states
# Navigate to another app

When we navigate to another app from the current app, global state should persist:

1. `appUnmounted()` triggered for the current app, unsubscribe to `URLHistory$`, and subscribe to stateUpdate$
2. `appMounted()` triggered for the app that we navigated to, so it unsubscribe its `stateUpdate$`, and subscribe to `URLHistory$`
3. `syncQueryStateWithUrl` is triggered, it then gets the saved global state from the `osdurlstatestorage` and set the top nav global states by using `globalQueryStateContainer`

# Diagrams

1. When first navigate to the visualize app, initialize and sync state storage and state containers
![img](./img/initialization.png)

2. When we navigate to another app, the browser wide storage instance stores the last active URL for each app and also updates the URL if there are any new global state values. This ensure global data persistence across different apps. For example, if we navigate from visualize app to discover app:

> ![img](./img/navigate.png)

Reviewer 2: <img width="608" alt="Screen Shot 2022-12-16 at 12 03 01" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/79961084/208179974-536c5e3d-3fd7-417a-af68-2d2197a871c5.png">
